=== Bhagavad Gita — Chapter 1: Arjuna-Vishada Yoga (The Distress of Arjuna) ===
Sanskrit source: sacred-texts.com romanized edition, cross-referenced with GRETIL; ancient text, no copyright.
English source: Kashinath Trimbak Telang, "The Bhagavadgita, with the Sanatsugatiya and the Anugita," Sacred Books of the East Vol. 8 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1882). Telang died 1893; work is public domain.
Verse numbering: Sanskrit retains native numbering 1.1–1.47. Telang's English translation is continuous prose covering the whole chapter — it was not segmented per-verse by the translator, so it is provided as a single chapter-level block below rather than a false 1:1 split.

[1.1]
SANSKRIT: dharmakṣetre kurukṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva kim akurvata sañjaya

[1.2]
SANSKRIT: dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṃ vyūḍhaṃ duryodhanas tadā ācāryam upasaṅgamya rājā vacanam abravīt

[1.3]
SANSKRIT: paśyaitāṃ pāṇḍuputrāṇām ācārya mahatīṃ camūm vyūḍhāṃ drupadaputreṇa tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

[1.4]
SANSKRIT: atra śūrā maheṣvāsā bhīmārjunasamā yudhi yuyudhāno virāṭaśca drupadaś ca mahārathaḥ

[1.5]
SANSKRIT: dhṛṣṭaketuś cekitānaḥ kāśirājaś ca vīryavān purujit kuntibhojaś ca śaibyaś ca narapuṅgavaḥ

[1.6]
SANSKRIT: yudhāmanyuś ca vikrānta uttamaujāś ca vīryavān saubhadro draupadeyāś ca sarva eva mahārathāḥ

[1.7]
SANSKRIT: asmākaṃ tu viśiṣṭā ye tān nibodha dvijottama nāyakā mama sainyasya saṃjñārthaṃ tān bravīmi te

[1.8]
SANSKRIT: bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca kṛpaś ca samitiñjayaḥ aśvatthāmā vikarṇaś ca saumadattis tathaiva ca

[1.9]
SANSKRIT: anye ca bahavaḥ śūrā madarthe tyaktajīvitāḥ nānāśastrapraharaṇāḥ sarve yuddhaviśāradāḥ

[1.10]
SANSKRIT: aparyāptaṃ tad asmākaṃ balaṃ bhīṣmābhirakṣitam paryāptaṃ tvidam eteṣāṃ balaṃ bhīmābhirakṣitam

[1.11]
SANSKRIT: ayaneṣu ca sarveṣu yathābhāgam avasthitāḥ bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi

[1.12]
SANSKRIT: tasya sañjanayan harṣaṃ kuruvṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ siṃhanādaṃ vinadyocchaiḥ śaṅkhaṃ dadhmau pratāpavān

[1.13]
SANSKRIT: tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca paṇavānakagomukhāḥ sahasaivābhyahanyanta sa śabdas tumulobhavat

[1.14]
SANSKRIT: tataḥ śvetair hayair yukte mahati syandane sthitau mādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaś caiva divyau śaṅkhau pradaghmatuḥ

[1.15]
SANSKRIT: pāñcajanyaṃ hṛṣīkeśo devadattaṃ dhanañjayaḥ pauṇḍraṃ dadhmau mahāśaṅkhaṃ bhīmakarmā vṛkodaraḥ

[1.16]
SANSKRIT: anañtavijayaṃ rājā kuntīputro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca sughoṣamaṇipuṣpakau

[1.17]
SANSKRIT: kāśyaś ca parameṣvāsaḥ śikhaṇḍī ca mahārathaḥ dhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś ca sātyakiś cāparājitaḥ

[1.18]
SANSKRIT: drupado draupadeyāś ca sarvaśaḥ pṛthivīpate saubhadraś ca mahābāhuḥ śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthakpṛthak

[1.19]
SANSKRIT: sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṃ hṛdayāni vyadārayat nabhaś ca pṛthivīṃ caiva tumulobhyanunādayan

[1.20]
SANSKRIT: atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā dhārtarāṣṭrān kapidhvajaḥ pravṛtte śastrasaṃpāte dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥ

[1.21]
SANSKRIT: hṛṣīkeśaṃ tadā vākyam idam āha mahīpate senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṃ sthāpaya mecyuta

[1.22]
SANSKRIT: yāvad etān nirikṣehaṃ yoddhukāmān avasthitān kair mayā saha yoddhavyam asmin raṇasamudyame

[1.23]
SANSKRIT: yotsyamānān avekṣehaṃ ya etetra samāgatāḥ dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher yuddhe priyacikīrṣavaḥ

[1.24]
SANSKRIT: evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo guḍākeśena bhārata senayor ubhayor madhye sthāpayitvā rathottamam

[1.25]
SANSKRIT: bhīṣmadroṇapramukhataḥ sarveṣāṃ ca mahīkṣitām uvāca pārtha paśyaitān samavetān kurūn iti

[1.26]
SANSKRIT: tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ pitṛn atha pitāmahān ācāryān mātulān bhrātṛn putrān pautrān sakhīṃs tathā

[1.27]
SANSKRIT: śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva senayor ubhayor api tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ sarvān bandhūn avasthitān

[1.28]
SANSKRIT: kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo viṣīdann idamabravīt dṛṣṭvemaṃ svajanaṃ kṛṣṇa yuyutsuṃ samupasthitam

[1.29]
SANSKRIT: sīdanti mama gātrāṇi mukhañ ca pariśuṣyati vepathuś ca śarīre me romaharṣaś ca jāyate

[1.30]
SANSKRIT: gāṇḍīvaṃ straṃsate hastāt tvak caiva paridahyate na ca śaknomy avasthātuṃ bhramatīva ca me manaḥ

[1.31]
SANSKRIT: nimittāni ca paśyāmi viparītāni keśava na ca śreyonupaśyāmi hatvā svajanam āhave

[1.32]
SANSKRIT: na kāṅkṣe vijayaṃ kṛṣṇa na ca rājyaṃ sukhāni ca kiṃ no rājyena govinda kiṃ bhogair jīvitena vā

[1.33]
SANSKRIT: yeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṃ no rājyaṃ bhogāḥ sukhāni ca ta imevasthitā yuddhe prāṇāṃs tyaktvā dhanāni ca

[1.34]
SANSKRIT: ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās tathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ śyālāḥ sambandhinas tathā

[1.35]
SANSKRIT: etān na hantum icchhāmi ghnatopi madhusūdana api trailokyarājyasya hetoḥ kiṃ nu mahīkṛte

[1.36]
SANSKRIT: nihatya dhārtarāṣṭrān naḥ kā prītiḥ syājanārdana pāpam evāśrayed asmān hatvaitān ātatāyinaḥ

[1.37]
SANSKRIT: tasmān nārhā vayaṃ hantuṃ dhārtarāṣṭrān svabāndhavān svajanaṃ hi kathaṃ hatvā sukhinaḥ syāma mādhava

[1.38]
SANSKRIT: yadyapyete na paśyanti lobhopahatacetasaḥ kulakṣayakṛtaṃ doṣaṃ mitradrohe ca pātakam

[1.39]
SANSKRIT: kathaṃ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ pāpād asmān nivartitum kulakṣayakṛtaṃ doṣaṃ prapaśyadbhir janārdana

[1.40]
SANSKRIT: kulakṣaye praṇaśyanti kuladharmāḥ sanātanāḥ dharme naṣṭe kulaṃ kṛtsnam adharmobhibhavaty uta

[1.41]
SANSKRIT: adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa praduṣyanti kulastriyaḥ strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya jāyate varṇasaṅkaraḥ

[1.42]
SANSKRIT: saṅkaro narakāyaiva kulaghnānāṃ kulasya ca patanti pitaro hy eṣāṃ luptapiṇḍodakakriyāḥ

[1.43]
SANSKRIT: doṣair etaiḥ kulaghnānāṃ varṇasaṅkarakārakaiḥ utsādyante jātidharmāḥ kuladharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ

[1.44]
SANSKRIT: utsannakuladharmāṇāṃ manuṣyāṇāṃ janārdana narake niyataṃ vāso bhavatīty anuśuśruma

[1.45]
SANSKRIT: aho bata mahat pāpaṃ kartuṃ vyavasitā vayam yad rājyasukhalobhena hantuṃ svajanam udyatāḥ

[1.46]
SANSKRIT: yadi mām apratīkāram aśastraṃ śastrapāṇayaḥ dhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus tan me kṣemataraṃ bhavet

[1.47]
SANSKRIT: evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye rathopastha upāviśat visṛjya saśaraṃ cāpaṃ śokasaṃvignamānasaḥ

--- CHAPTER-LEVEL ENGLISH TRANSLATION (Telang, 1882) ---

Dhritarashtra said: What did my (people) and the Pandavas do, O Sanjaya! when they assembled together on the holy field of Kurukshetra, desirous to do battle?

Sanjaya said: Seeing the army of the Pandavas drawn up in battle-array, the prince Duryodhana approached the preceptor, and spoke these words: "O preceptor! observe this grand army of the sons of Pandu, drawn up in battle-array by your talented pupil, the son of Drupada. In it are heroes bearing large bows, the equals of Bhima and Arjuna in battle — namely, Yuyudhana, Virata, and Drupada, the master of a great car, and Dhrishtaketu, Kekitana, and the valiant king of Kasi, Purujit and Kuntibhoja, and that eminent man Saibya; the heroic Yudhamanyu, the valiant Uttamaujas, the son of Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi — all masters of great cars. And now, O best of Brahmanas! learn who are most distinguished among us, and are leaders of my army. I will name them to you, in order that you may know them well. Yourself, and Bhishma, and Karna, and Kripa the victor of many battles; Asvatthaman, and Vikarna, and also the son of Somadatta, and many other brave men, who have given up their lives for me, who fight with various weapons, and are all dexterous in battle. Thus our army which is protected by Bhishma is unlimited; while this army of theirs which is protected by Bhima is very limited. And therefore do ye all, occupying respectively the positions assigned to you, protect Bhishma only."

Then his powerful grandsire, Bhishma, the oldest of the Kauravas, roaring aloud like a lion, blew his conch, thereby affording delight to Duryodhana. And then all at once, conchs, and kettledrums, and tabors, and trumpets were played upon; and there was a tumultuous din. Then, too, Madhava and the son of Pandu (Arjuna), seated in a grand chariot to which white steeds were yoked, blew their heavenly conchs. Hrishikesa blew the Pankajanya, and Dhananjaya the Devadatta, and Bhima, the doer of fearful deeds, blew the great conch Paundra. King Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, blew the Anantavijaya, and Nakula and Sahadeva respectively the Sughosha and Manipushpaka. And the king of Kasi, too, who has an excellent bow, and Sikhandin, the master of a great car, and Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, and the unconquered Satyaki, and Drupada, and the sons of Draupadi, and the son of Subhadra, of mighty arms, blew conchs severally from all sides, O king of the earth! That tumultuous din rent the hearts of all the people of Dhritarashtra's party, causing reverberations throughout heaven and earth. Then seeing the people of Dhritarashtra's party regularly marshalled, the son of Pandu, whose standard is the ape, raised his bow, after the discharge of missiles had commenced, and O king of the earth! spake these words to Hrishikesa: "O undegraded one! station my chariot between the two armies, while I observe those who stand here desirous to engage in battle, and with whom, in the labours of this struggle, I must do battle. I will observe those who are assembled here and who are about to engage in battle, wishing to do service in battle to the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra."

Sanjaya said: Thus addressed by Gudakesa, O descendant of Bharata! Hrishikesa stationed that excellent chariot between the two armies, in front of Bhishma and Drona and of all the kings of the earth, and said "O son of Pritha! look at these assembled Kauravas." There the son of Pritha saw in both armies, fathers and grandfathers, preceptors, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, companions, fathers-in-law, as well as friends. And seeing all those kinsmen standing there, the son of Kunti was overcome by excessive pity, and spake thus despondingly.

Arjuna said: Seeing these kinsmen, O Krishna! standing here desirous to engage in battle, my limbs droop down; my mouth is quite dried up; a tremor comes on my body; and my hairs stand on end; the Gandiva (bow) slips from my hand; my skin burns intensely. I am unable, too, to stand up; my mind whirls round, as it were; O Kesava! I see adverse omens; and I do not perceive any good to accrue after killing my kinsmen in the battle. I do not wish for victory, O Krishna! nor sovereignty, nor pleasures: what is sovereignty to us, O Govinda! what enjoyments, and even life? Even those, for whose sake we desire sovereignty, enjoyments, and pleasures, are standing here for battle, abandoning life and wealth — preceptors, fathers, sons as well as grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, as also other relatives. These I do not wish to kill, though they kill me, O destroyer of Madhu! even for the sake of sovereignty over the three worlds, how much less then for this earth alone? What joy shall be ours, O Janardana! after killing Dhritarashtra's sons? Killing these felons we shall only incur sin. Therefore it is not proper for us to kill our own kinsmen, the sons of Dhritarashtra. For how, O Madhava! shall we be happy after killing our own relatives? Although having their consciences corrupted by avarice, they do not see the evils flowing from the extinction of a family, and the sin in treachery to friends, still, O Janardana! should not we, who do see the evils flowing from the extinction of a family, learn to refrain from that sin? On the extinction of a family, the eternal rites of families are destroyed. Those rites being destroyed, impiety predominates over the whole family. In consequence of the predominance of impiety, O Krishna! the women of the family become corrupt; and the women becoming corrupt, O descendant of Vrishni! intermingling of castes results; that intermingling necessarily leads the family and the destroyers of the family to hell; for when the ceremonies of offering the balls of food and water to them fail, their ancestors fall down to hell. By these transgressions of the destroyers of families, which occasion interminglings of castes, the eternal rites of castes and rites of families are subverted. And O Janardana! we have heard that men whose family-rites are subverted, must necessarily live in hell. Alas! we are engaged in committing a heinous sin, seeing that we are making efforts for killing our own kinsmen out of greed of the pleasures of sovereignty. If the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapon in hand, should kill me in battle, me weaponless and not defending myself, that would be better for me.

Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna cast aside his bow together with the arrows, on the battle-field, and sat down in his chariot, with a mind agitated by grief.

--- END CHAPTER 1 ---
